We've seen in previous examples
how the initial value of the chain
can affect how quickly
the chain converges.
If our initial value is far from
the bulk of the posterior distribution,
then it may take a while for the chain to
travel there as we saw in this example.
Where the posterior mean is close to 1,
but we started the chain
way out here at 10.
It took a long time for
the chain to wander to the right area and
start exploring that
posterior distribution.
Clearly, the first 100 or so
iterations do not reflect draws
from this stationary distribution.
So they should be discarded before we use
this chain for Monte Carlo estimates.
This is called the burn in period.
You should always discard early iterations
that do not appear to be coming
from the stationary distribution.
Even if the chain appears
to have converged early on,
it is a safer practice to
discard an initial burn-in.
If we want to be more confident that we
have converged to this true stationary
distribution, we can
simulate multiple chains,
each with a different starting value.
Let's run that simulation.
Where post1 has a specific starting value.
Post2 has a different starting value and
so forth down to posterior5.
I'm going to combine all of
these chains into one MCMC
object using the MCMC list function
Now, let's look at the trace plot for
this multi-chain simulation.
We started each of this chains at
very different initial values, but
as you can see, as we progress through
the iterations, after about 100
maybe 200 iterations, these chains have
all converged to the same location.
This increases our confidence
that what we have found is
in fact the stationary distribution
that we are looking for.
Trace plots provide an informal diagnostic
for the convergence of our chains.
We can back up these visual results
with the Gelman and Rubin diagnostic.
This diagnostic requires
that we fit multiple chains.
It calculates the variability
within chains and
compares that to the variability
between the chains.
First, we need to combine
the chains all into one object here
with mcmc.list function and
we'll start a new script and
call the diagnostic.
It's part of the coda package,
and it's called gelman.diag for
that object that we just created.
Again, the diagnostic compares
the variability within the chains
to the variability between the chains.
If all chains have converged
to the stationary distribution
the variability between the chains
should be relatively small.
And this potential scale reduction factor,
which is the statistic
computed by this diagnostic,
should be a small number close to 1.
If values are much higher than 1,
then we would conclude that
the chains have not yet converged.
We can also create a plot
to go with this diagnostic,
it's called gelman.plot,
for our combined chains.
And it shows us how the shrinkage factor
changes as we add iterations to the chain.
From this plot, we can see that if
we only use the first 50 iterations,
then the potential scale reduction factor,
or the shrink factor,
would be close to ten indicating
that the chains have not converged.
But once we're passed about 300
iterations, the shrink factor is
essentially one indicating that by then,
we have probably reached convergence.
Of course we shouldn't stop sampling as
soon as we reach convergent, instead this
is where we should begin saving our
samples for Monte Carlo estimation.
To get more information
on this diagnostics,
we can type ?gelman.diag to access
the documentation for this function.
Again if we want to learn
more about the Gelman and
Rubin convergence diagnostic,
this would be the place to start.
It describes the diagnostic,
describes the function, talks a little
bit about the theory underlying this
diagnostic, and gives us the sources.
If we are reasonably confident that
our Markov chain has converged,
then we can go ahead and treat it as
though it were a Monte Carlo sample from
the posterior distribution, albeit
with a smaller effective sample size.
That means that we can use
the techniques from lesson three
to calculate posterior quantities
like the posterior mean and
the posterior intervals
from the samples directly.
Let's return to the first example where
we have the chain that appeared to have
converged, to remind ourselves let's
look at the trace plot for it again.
We have 4,000 iterations of a chain that
appears that is has already converged.
But, to be safe, let's discard
the first 1,000 iterations as burn-in.
So the number of burn-in iterations,
nburn will be 1000.
Let's read that in.
And let's create a set of
samples that we want to keep.
We'll add this onto our list for
post0, and call it mu_keep.
It will come from the original post0 mus.
But now we're going to discard the first
1000 iterations, 1 through nburn.
Let's look at the structure now of post0
And now we have the samples of
mu that we're going to keep.
There are 3,000 of these samples.
Since we're confident that this has
reached the stationary distribution,
we can be confident In
our Monte Carlo estimate.
So let's look at
the summary of this object.
Of mu_keep.
We've seen this before.
It provides a brief summary
of our inferences for
the mean mu,
that parameter we've been estimating.
It has mean close to 0.9 as we
have seen in previous examples.
Standard deviation 0.3 and
has these different quintiles.
For example,
the 0.025 quintile is this number and
the 0.97 quintile is this number.
So if we wanted to create
a posterior interval for mu,
we could say that the posterior
probability that mu is
between this number and
this number is 0.95.
We can also compute posterior
probabilities of different hypotheses.
For example,
if we want to know the posterior
probability that mu is greater than 1.
We'll just take the mean of an indicator
And we're going to count how many of
these samples are greater than 1.
Our posterior probability is about
0.35 that mu is greater than 1